Jury Panel Directions: Empanelment and Applications for Excusal
Final Opportunity to Seek Excusal

Members of the jury panel, you are about to be given a final opportunity to apply to be excused from serving on the jury in this trial. It is important that you listen carefully to the information I am about to provide, so that you may determine whether there is any proper basis upon which you should make such an application.

Information Relevant to Jury Service

Before a jury is empanelled, the panel should ordinarily be informed of certain matters, including the nature of the charge, the identity of the accused, the names of the principal witnesses expected to give evidence, the estimated duration of the trial, and any other information the court considers relevant pursuant to the Juries Act 2000.

As a matter of practice, it is generally desirable that the names of all expected witnesses be read out, together with the names of any other persons who may be referred to during the hearing where knowledge of those persons might cause embarrassment or create difficulty for a juror. Where the list is lengthy, written provision of those names may be more convenient.

In addition, jurors should be informed not only of the likely duration of the trial, but also, where appropriate, of the court’s usual sitting hours and any anticipated interruption in the hearing. If the court proposes to provide any further information relevant to impartiality, that matter should ordinarily be discussed with counsel beforehand. In some cases, it may also be proper to ask prospective jurors whether they hold strong views on an issue that could affect their ability to remain impartial.

Possible Prejudicial Knowledge

It is essential that every juror approach the case with a wholly open mind and without favouring one side or the other. Difficulty may arise where a juror knows one of the persons involved in the proceeding, or knows something about that person, because in such a case the juror may not in fact be impartial, or may at least appear to others to favour one side. Either possibility may undermine the interests of justice.

A similar difficulty may arise where a juror has, or believes that he or she has, prior knowledge of the facts of the case.

For those reasons, I must now provide identifying information concerning the case and the persons involved in it. You should listen carefully and consider whether you recognise any of the names mentioned, or whether you have any information or knowledge relevant to the case. If you do, you should apply to be excused when my associate asks you to do so.

The accused is [insert name].
The accused is charged with [insert and describe the offence(s), including the name(s) of any victim(s), if appropriate].
The following persons are expected to be called as witnesses: [insert names].
The following persons may also be referred to during the course of the trial: [insert names of other persons whose identification may affect a juror].
[Any further information relevant to impartiality may also be given after prior discussion with counsel.]

If any member of the panel knows the accused, or any of the persons whose names have been mentioned, or has prior knowledge relevant to the matter, that person should raise the issue by applying to be excused.

Duration of the Trial

This trial is expected to continue until [insert anticipated end date]. During that time, jurors will be required to attend court on the specified sitting days and during the hours fixed by the court, subject to any notified adjournment or interruption.

Before the panel was assembled, the Juries Commissioner will ordinarily have provided prospective jurors with information about the expected length of the trial and the court’s sitting arrangements. Prospective jurors will also generally have been invited to apply for deferral on the basis of matters such as childcare responsibilities, travel commitments, employment difficulties, or health concerns that may interfere with jury service. Many such applications are dealt with administratively by the Juries Commissioner. As a result, it is to be expected that only a limited number of applications based on personal circumstances will remain for determination by the court.

If you consider that the likely duration of the trial or your personal circumstances prevent you from serving, you may apply to be excused when invited to do so.

Grounds on Which a Juror May Be Excused

Once the relevant information has been given to the panel, the court must ask whether any member of the panel seeks to be excused from serving on the jury for the trial. Under the Juries Act 2000, the court may excuse a prospective juror if satisfied that the person would be unable to consider the case impartially, or is unable to serve for some other reason.
However, the statutory scheme was later amended, and, in response to the increasing number of cases in which prospective jurors were excused, the law was revised so as to preclude the excusal of jurors from service. This means that no prospective juror must be excused from service. 
The existence of a particular life experience does not, by itself, require that a person be excused. For example, it should not simply be assumed that a person who has been the victim of a sexual offence is more likely than any other juror to be prejudiced in a sexual offence trial. 

Where a substantial quantity of written material is likely to be provided to the jury during the trial, the judge may consider informing jurors of that fact before applications for excusal are invited. This allows any person who has difficulty reading to seek excusal on that basis.

Similarly, if, at the time of taking a juror’s oath or affirmation, it becomes apparent that there is some difficulty that may restrict the juror’s capacity to serve, such as difficulty with English or a physical condition affecting participation, the judge may consider excusing that juror.

Procedure for Applications

Applications for excusal may appropriately be made in writing, as jurors may reasonably wish to keep their reasons confidential. Whether any written application should be disclosed to the defence is a matter for the judge’s discretion.

There is no absolute right on the part of the accused to be informed of the grounds upon which a prospective juror seeks to be excused, nor of the reasons why such an application may be refused.

Likewise, there is no strict requirement that applications for excusal be heard and determined in public. This was regarded as underscoring the seriousness of the civic duty to serve on a jury. Accordingly, the statutory scheme was later amended in order to narrow the availability of excusal, so that applications to be excused would arise only in more limited circumstances.

Other Personal Reasons Affecting Service

There may also be other personal reasons why a person feels unable to serve on the jury in the particular case. The law recognises that excusal may be appropriate where a person would be unable to consider the case impartially or is otherwise unable to serve.

A prospective juror should therefore consider carefully whether he or she can decide the matter fairly. In one sexual offence case, a prospective juror told the judge that the case was “too close to home,” which may have indicated an inability to treat the parties fairly. At the same time, it does not follow that every person with a similar life experience is incapable of serving impartially. Many such people do in fact serve as jurors and are able to set aside personal experience, sympathy, or bias and perform their duty in accordance with the evidence and the law.
However, more recently, it has increasingly been argued that such experiences may in fact contribute positively to the deliberative process, and that excluding persons from jury service on that basis is not appropriate. As a result, public sentiment has developed against excusal on those grounds, and such exclusions have ceased to occur.
