5.8.2 Checklist: Commonwealth Joint Commission Accordance with Agreement

Four elements the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt:

1. 1. The accused made an agreement with other people to commit an offence, and

2. 2. The accused and at least one other party to the agreement intended that an offence would be committed; and

3. 3. In accordance with the agreement, the parties between them performed all of the acts needed to commit the offence; and

4. 4. The accused did not effectively terminate his/her involvement before the offence was committed.

1. Agreement

5. 1. Did the accused make an agreement with other people to commit the offence charged?

1. If Yes, then go to Question 2.1

2. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

2. Intention

6. 2.1 Did the accused intend that an offence would be committed under the agreement?

1. Consider – Was the accused aware the offence would occur in the ordinary course of events?

3. If Yes, then go to Question 2.2

4. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

7. 2.2 Did one other party to the agreement intend that an offence would be committed under the agreement?

5. If Yes, then the go to Question 3.1

6. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

3. Offence committed in accordance with agreement

8. 3.1 Did the parties to the agreement commit all of the necessary acts to complete the offence?

7. If Yes, then go to Question 3.2

8. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

9. 3.2. Was the offence within the scope of the parties’ agreement?

2. Consider – What beliefs did the parties hold at the time they made the agreement? Did they believe that the offence would or could be committed in the course of carrying out the agreement?

9. If Yes, then go to Question 4.1

10. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

4. Termination

10. 4.1 Did the accused terminate his or her involvement in the agreement before any part of the offence was committed?

11. If Yes, then go to Question 4.2

12. If No, then the accused is guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission (as long as you have also answered Yes to questions 1, 2 and 3)

11. 4.2 Did the accused take all reasonable steps to prevent the offence from being committed?

3. Consider – What steps did the accused take? In the circumstances, were those all the steps s/he could reasonably take?

13. If Yes, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

14. If No, then the accused is guilty committing the offence charged by way of joint commission (as long as you have also answered Yes to questions 1, 2 and 3)

Last updated: 17 November 2022