4.17.2 Charge: Tendency Evidence (Sexual Interest Evidence)

This charge may be given if evidence that the accused had an improper sexual interest in a single complainant has been admitted as tendency evidence. See 3.1 Directions Under Jury Directions Act 2015 for information on when directions are required.

A short direction based on this charge should be given at the time the evidence is led.

Permissible Uses of "Sexual Interest" Evidence

Members of the jury, part of the prosecution case is that NOA has demonstrated a sexual interest in the complainant and a willingness to act on that interest.

[Identify relevant tendency evidence.]

The prosecution argues that [summarise prosecution arguments on the use of tendency evidence]. In response, the defence says [summarise defence arguments on the use of tendency evidence].

If you find that NOA had a sexual interest in the complainant and was willing to act on that interest, then you can use that to find that it is more likely that NOA committed [identify relevant offences].

The prosecution also says that this evidence sets the scene in which the alleged offences took place. Without the evidence, there is a risk that NOC’s evidence would be incomplete and may even be incomprehensible.

[Explain how the provision of contextual information can assist the jury. Possibilities include helping the jury to understand:

- The complainant’s alleged conduct or state of mind at the time of the offence, such as why s/he might have submitted to the accused’s demands or did not complain about the alleged offending);

- The accused’s alleged conduct or state of mind at the time of the offence, such as why s/he felt able to act in a particularly brazen manner);

- The circumstances of the alleged offence, such as to show that the complainant does not say that the offence occurred "out of the blue".]

You must keep this evidence in perspective. It is only one part of the prosecution’s case.  It is not enough to convict the accused that you find [he/she] [identify the tendency evidence, e.g. “committed the uncharged acts”] or had acted on a sexual interest in NOC in the past. You can only find NOA guilty of a charge if you are satisfied of [his/her] guilt of that charge beyond reasonable doubt, based on the whole of the evidence.

As I have told you, you must not decide the case on the basis of feelings of sympathy or prejudice because of what you learn about the accused. The evidence has been led for the limited purpose of helping you understand the circumstances surrounding the alleged offending and to show that NOA had a sexual interest in NOC and a willingness to act on that interest, and so s/he is more likely to have committed the offence(s) charged. You must not use the evidence for any other purpose.

Last updated: 14 May 2024