4.5.2 Charge: Withdrawn Committal Plea

It is not disputed that NOA initially pleaded guilty to NOO.

You can use this guilty plea as an admission of guilt. However, before you can do so, you must consider two matters.

First, you must accept that the plea was a true acknowledgement of his/her guilt of NOO. That is, you must accept that when NOA pleaded guilty to NOO, s/he was admitting his/her guilt of that offence.

Secondly, you must accept that the plea was intended to be a true acknowledgment of his/her guilt. This requires you to accept that when NOA pleaded guilty, s/he meant to accept his/her responsibility for the crime of NOO, and that that admission was, in fact, true.

[If a warning under Evidence Act 2008 s 165 is necessary, add the following shaded section:]

In considering this evidence, I must warn you of the need for caution when considering evidence of NOA’s earlier guilty plea.

Matters that may cause unreliability

I must give you this warning because it is the experience of the law that evidence of admissions may be unreliable. This is because [identify all of the risks of unreliability posed by the specific evidence in the case. Some possibilities include:

- It was not possible for you to assess NOA’s demeanour at the time s/he made the admission, which may make it harder to assess whether the admission was true and was intended to be true;

- [Describe relevant inducement or other relevant circumstance] may have caused NOA to make a false plea;

- NOA may have been subject to pressures that caused him/her to make a false plea, which you do not know about.]

Warning

The law says that every jury must take this potential unreliability into account when considering evidence of an admission. You must take it into account in deciding whether NOA’s plea was a true acknowledgement of his/her guilt of NOO and whether it was intended to be a true acknowledgement of guilt.

The prosecution invite you to use NOA’s earlier guilty plea as evidence of his/her guilt. [Describe relevant prosecution evidence and/or arguments.]

The defence argued that you should not use the evidence in this way. They say [describe relevant defence evidence and/or arguments, e.g.* "that NOA only pleaded guilty to bring an end to the matter" or "that NOA was not aware that s/he had a valid defence".]

It is for you to determine, based on all of the relevant evidence, whether NOA’s guilty plea was, and was intended to be, a true acknowledgment of his/her guilt of NOO. Unless you accept that both of these matters have been proven, you must disregard the evidence of NOA’s alleged admission.

Last updated: 9 March 2017