5.5.4 Checklist: Aiding and Abetting

Three elements the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt:

1. Someone committed the offence charged; and

1. The accused knew of, or believed in, the essential circumstances needed to establish that offence; and

2. The accused intentionally assisted or encouraged the principal offender to commit that offence.

1. Commission of the Offence

1. 1. Did someone commit the offence charged?

1. Consider – Has the prosecution proven all of the elements of that offence?

1. If Yes, then go to Question 2

2. If No, then the accused is not guilty of aiding or abetting the offence charged

2. Knowledge of Essential Circumstances

2. 2. Did the accused know of, or believe in, the essential circumstances needed to establish that offence?

2. Consider – When s/he assisted or encouraged the principal offender to commit the offence charged, did the accused know of, or believe in, all of the matters considered in question 1?

3. If Yes, then go to Question 3

4. If No, then the accused is not guilty of aiding or abetting the offence charged

3. Assistance or Encouragement

3. 3. Did the accused intentionally assist or encourage the principal offender to commit that offence?

1. 3.1 Did the accused intentionally help the principal offender to commit that offence?

5. If Yes, then the accused is guilty of the offence charged (as long as you have also answered Yes to questions 1 and 2)

6. If No, then go to Question 3.2

2. 3.2 Did the accused intentionally encourage the principal offender to commit that offence?

7. If Yes, then the accused is guilty of the offence charged (as long as you have also answered Yes to questions 1 and 2)

8. If No, then go to Question 3.3

3. 3.3 Did the accused intentionally convey to the principal offender by words or presence and behaviour that s/he supported the commission of that offence?

3. Consider – Did the accused attempt to communicate his/her support to the principal offender, and indicate his/her willingness to assist if required?

9. If Yes, then the accused is guilty of the offence charged (as long as you have also answered Yes to questions 1 and 2)

10. If No, then the accused is not guilty of aiding or abetting the offence charged

Last updated: 23 April 2008