5.8.4 Checklist: Commonwealth Joint Commission Course of Agreement

Five elements the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt:

1. 1. The accused made an agreement with other people to commit an offence, and the agreement was still in place when [insert charged offence] was committed; and

2. 2. The accused and at least one other party to the agreement intended that an offence would be committed under the agreement; and

3. 3. A party to the agreement committed the offence charged while carrying out the agreement; and

4. 4. The accused was reckless about whether the offence would be committed in the course of the agreement; and

5. 5. The accused did not effectively terminate his/her involvement before the offence charged was committed.

1. Agreement

6. 1. Did the accused make an agreement with other people to commit an offence?

1. If Yes, then go to Question 2.1

2. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

2. Intention

7. 2.1 Did the accused intend that an offence would be committed under the agreement?

8. Consider – Was the accused aware that an offence would occur in the ordinary course of events?

3. If Yes, then go to Question 2.2

4. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

9. 2.2 Did one other party to the agreement intend that an offence would be committed under the agreement?

5. If Yes, then go to Question 3.1

6. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

3. Offence committed

10. 3.1 Did a party to the agreement commit all of the necessary acts to complete the charged offence?

7. If Yes, then go to Question 3.2

8. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

11. 3.2. Did that person commit the charged offence while carrying out the agreement?

9. If Yes, then go to Question 4.1

10. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

4. Recklessness

12. 4.1 Was the accused aware of a substantial risk that the charged offence would be committed while the agreement was being carried out?

11. If Yes, then go to Question 4.2

12. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

13. 4.2 Was it unjustifiable for the accused to take that risk?

13. If Yes, then go to Question 5.1

14. If No, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

5. Termination

14. 5.1 Did the accused terminate his or her involvement in the agreement before any part of the charged offence was committed?

15. If Yes, then go to Question 6.2

16. If No, then the accused is guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission (as long as you have also answered Yes to questions 1, 2, 3 and 4)

15. 5.2 Did the accused take all reasonable steps to prevent the offence from being committed?

1. Consider – What steps did the accused take? In the circumstances, were those all the steps s/he could reasonably take?

17. If Yes, then the accused is not guilty of committing the offence charged by way of joint commission

18. If No, then the accused is guilty committing the offence charged by way of joint commission (as long as you have also answered Yes to questions 1, 2, 3 and 4)

Last updated: 17 November 2022